add lower crustal flow cookbook (#5276)
geodynamics/aspect: cookbooks/lower_crustal_flow/doc/lower_crustal_flow.md

(sec:cookbooks:lower-crustal-flow)=
# Lower crust flow with an obstacle

*This section was contributed by Cedric Thieulot.*

> The setup for this experiment originates in {cite:t}`clark:bush:royden:2005`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The setup for this experiment originates in {cite:t}`clark:bush:royden:2005`,
```

in which the authors model dynamic stresses associated with the obstruction of lower crustal

> channel flow due to rheological heterogeneity in Eastern Tibet and compare model calculations with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
channel flow due to rheological heterogeneity in Eastern Tibet. They compare model calculations with
```

observed topography where they interpret channel flow of
the deep crust to be inhibited by the rigid Sichuan Basin as illustrated in {numref}`fig:lower-crust-flow-clark1`

> and {numref}`fig:lower-crust-flow-clark2`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and {numref}`fig:lower-crust-flow-clark2`. 
```

```{figure-md} fig:lower-crust-flow-clark1
<img src="clark1.*" width="70%" />

3-D perspective of digital topography of eastern and southeastern Tibet, view to the west and northwest.
Taken from {cite:t}`clark:bush:royden:2005`.
```

```{figure-md} fig:lower-crust-flow-clark2
<img src="clark2.*" width="70%" />

General model showing map-view patterns of high and low dynamic pressures. Background flow is from left to right.
Positive dynamic pressure (i.e. a load acting upwards on the top of the channel) is observed ‘upstream’ of the flow direction and predicts uplift at the surface.
Taken from {cite:t}`clark:bush:royden:2005`.
```

> A discussion of this model in the context of Eastern tibet is provided in {cite:t}`pitard:replumaz:thieulot:doin:2023`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A discussion of this model in the context of Eastern Tibet is provided in {cite:t}`pitard:replumaz:thieulot:doin:2023`.
```

> A discussion of this model in the context of Eastern tibet is provided in {cite:t}`pitard:replumaz:thieulot:doin:2023`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A discussion of this model in the context of Eastern Tibet is provided in {cite:t}`pitard:replumaz:thieulot:doin:2023`.
```

The domain is a 3D Cartesian box of size

> $(L_x,L_y,L_z) = (1000~\text{ km}, 500~\text{ km}, 15~\text{ km})$.

Reviewer: I think the ~ already makes a space so you don;t need the second one; at least in the rendered html version these spaces look really big at the moment. 
```suggestion
$(L_x,L_y,L_z) = (1000~\text{km}, 500~\text{km}, 15~\text{km})$.
```

> Gravity is set to zero so that density values are of no importance.

Reviewer 2: Interesting choice :-)

Boundary conditions are no-slip at the top ($z=0$) and bottom ($z=L_z$),
free slip on the $y=0$ and $y=L_y$ sides, and a parabolic
Poiseuille flow velocity $u(z)$ is prescribed on the $x=0$ and $x=L_x$ sides:
```{math}
u(z)=U_0 \frac{4z(L_z-z)}{L_z^2}
```

> with $U_0=80~\text{ mm year}^{-1}$.

Reviewer 2: Should this have been `u(x)` or `u(y)`?

One may have lengthy discussions about the usefulness of choosing a Poiseuille profile. Apparently they think of the atmosphere as not only stagnant, but also as *extremely* sticky.

Author: no no, they are modelling the lower crust. The upper crust is above, and assumed not to move (as fast/at all).
it is then u(z)

Temperature plays no role here and fluids are assumed to be Newtonian.
Because of the symmetry of the problem, we only model half of it, and

> the obstacle is a half cylinder centered at location $(x,y) = (L_x/2,0)$

Reviewer 2: Is it correct that you are thinking of this as a "vertical" cylinder? Perhaps add that word.

Author: indeed!

> and has a radius of $200~\text{ km}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and has a radius of $200~\text{km}$.
```

> The obstacle has a viscosity of $2\cdot 10^{21}~\text{ Pa s}$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The obstacle has a viscosity of $2\cdot 10^{21}~\text{Pa s}$
```

which is 1000 times larger than the viscosity of the lower crust

> $2\cdot 10^{18}~\text{ Pa s}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$2\cdot 10^{18}~\text{Pa s}$.
```

Because kinematical boundary conditions are prescribed on all 6 sides
there is a pressure nullspace that is removed by requiring that the
average of the pressure over the whole volume is zero.

The viscosity field is shown in {numref}`fig:lower-crust-flow-setup`

```{figure-md} fig:lower-crust-flow-setup
<img src="viscosity.*" width="85%"/>

> Viscosity field.

Reviewer: Can you add units here?

```

The velocity field is shown in {numref}`fig:lower-crust-flow-vel`

```{figure-md} fig:lower-crust-flow-vel
<img src="velocity.*" width="65%" />

> Velocity field at the $(x=0,y=0)$ corner.

Reviewer: I am confused: from the description and equation for the Poiseuille flow velocity I would have expected the velocity to be symmetric around z = L_z / 2, but in this image there is something else on top? Did I miss something here? Can you clarify this?

Author: done.

```

One can look at the velocity, pressure and strain rate fields on the $z=L_z/2$ plane,
as shown in {numref}`fig:lower-crust-flow-section-vel`,
{numref}`fig:lower-crust-flow-section-press` and
{numref}`fig:lower-crust-flow-section-sr`.

```{figure-md} fig:lower-crust-flow-section-vel
<img src="section-vel.*" width="80%" />

Velocity field on $z=L_z/2$ plane.
```

```{figure-md} fig:lower-crust-flow-section-press
<img src="section-press.*" width="80%" />

Pressure field on $z=L_z/2$ plane.
```

```{figure-md} fig:lower-crust-flow-section-sr
<img src="section-sr.*" width="80%" />

Strain rate field on $z=L_z/2$ plane.
```

> Note that by setting the viscosity of the obstacle to the same viscosity as the flowing crust then
> the velocity assumes the prescribed parabolic profile everywhere and the pressure is linear and only depends on $x$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that when the viscosity of the obstacle is set to the same viscosity as the flowing crust then
the velocity assumes the prescribed parabolic profile everywhere and the pressure is linear and only depends on $x$.
```
